Can Large Vision-Language Models Correct Semantic Grounding Errors By Themselves?

Yuan-Hong Liao1, Rafid Mahmood2,3, Sanja Fidler1,2, David Acuna2
1University of Toronto, Vector Institute 2NVIDIA 3University of Ottawa
answer@cs.toronto.edu, mahmood@telfer.uottawa.ca, {sfidler, dacunamarrer}@nvidia

Abstract

Enhancing semantic grounding abilities in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) often involves collecting domain-specific training data, refining the network architectures, or modifying the training recipes. In this work, we venture into an orthogonal direction and explore semantic grounding in VLMs through self-correction, without requiring in-domain data, fine-tuning, or modifications to the network architectures. Despite the concerns raised in the self-correction of LLMs, we find that if prompted and framed properly, VLMs can correct their own semantic grounding mistakes even without the access to the oracle feedback. We also show an identified self-correction framework in an iterative setting which consistently improves performance across all models investigated. Overall, iterative self-correction consistently improves VLM performance by up to 8.4 accuracy points across all models investigated; yet, after several rounds of feedback, strong models like GPT-4V and GPT-4o still exhibit significant error rates, indicating promising directions for further research.

1. Introduction

The evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) to encompass multimodal inputs has given rise to an emerging paradigm of general-purpose models that can solve multimodal understanding problems via user-prompt interaction [39, 49–51, 58]. Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are a growing family of multimodal models that simultaneously understand both visual and language cues. These models have demonstrated strong zero-shot performance on tasks including image classification [9], captioning [61], visual question answering [1, 14], reasoning [62, 63] and robotics [7, 41].

Despite VLMs’ strong visual-language understanding abilities, fine-grained visual grounding remains challenging. Specifically, VLMs struggle to comprehend region-specific information within complex scenes, such as when prompted to describe specific objects in a crowded image [5, 57, 60] (see Fig. 1). Prior works address this limitation using additional in-domain data [16, 28, 31], finetuning, or architectural changes [30, 35]. However, these approaches require significant computational resources [4, 60].

On the other hand, adjacent LLM literature has demonstrated that LLMs correct their own mistakes [37, 45], suggesting a potential way to improve VLMs without additional training. This behavior is termed self-correction, a framework that refines LLM responses using LLMs during inference, possibly with external tools or knowledge [6, 13]. However, follow-up works in LLMs [19, 21] argue that LLMs struggle to self-correct without access to oracle feedback. Currently, there is no clear consensus on when LLMs can effectively perform self-correction [21]. Prior work suggests that self-correction is limited by feedback quality [13, 43] and is more reliable with tools like search engines or compilers [19].

In this work, we explore self-correction in VLMs with a focus on multi-modal understanding, connecting language to visual concepts—a largely unexplored area to date. Specifically, we investigate self-correction within semantic grounding tasks, as illustrated in Fig.1. Semantic grounding is well-suited for this exploration because it demands the integration of language and visual concepts, requires fine-grained visual understanding, and involves multi-modal reasoning, all of which have significant real-world applications as well as the task itself [10, 40, 52]. More importantly, VLMs have demonstrated the ability to provide useful feedback in some visual tasks [36, 67], leaving the door open for self-correction in VLMs. Specifically, we focus on two key questions: (i) Can VLMs receive and understand grounding feedback? (ii) Can VLMs provide grounding feedback? We then combine the key findings from these two questions to evaluate whether VLMs can self-correct their mistakes by leveraging another instance of the same model during inference. To mitigate the high difficulty of generating reliable feedback, we identify that semantic grounding can be decomposed into easier binary verification tasks, therefore, getting more reliable feedback.

We evaluate the effectiveness of self-correction in our context by repurposing panoptic segmentation datasets from ADE20k [70] and COCO [32] for semantic grounding [57, 66]. We analyze three state-of-the-art open-source VLMs (LLaVA-1.5 [33], ViP-LLaVA [4], and CogVLM [53]) and two proprietary VLMs (GPT-4V [58] and GPT-4o) to identify consistent trends. Finally, with no additional finetuning and no access to the oracle feedback, we show that the self-correction framework improves semantic grounding performance in VLMs by up to 8.4 accuracy points.

Below, we summarize the key findings in our exploration:
1. VLMs can receive and understand feedback to improve semantic grounding. With a single round of oracle binary feedback, open-source VLMs improve their semantic grounding performances up to 9 accuracy points, suggesting the feedback potentials to improve grounding performance in VLMs (Sec. 4.1).
2. VLMs can provide high-quality feedback for themselves. By decomposing semantic grounding into an easier binary verification step and adopting visual prompts, the identified binary verification mechanism improves feedback quality up to an 18-point in F1 score compared to the baseline (Sec. 4.2).
3. Under the iterative self-correction framework, VLMs improve semantic grounding accuracy up to 8.4 accuracy points without the access to the oracle. Across five VLMs, including three open-source and two proprietary, GPT-4V and GPT-4o, our findings consistently indicate that feedback enhances semantic grounding in VLMs (Sec. 5.2).
4. Open-source VLMs make errors in semantic grounding even if feedback explicitly states the ground truths. The fact that some models could fail in approximately 25% of cases in this scenario highlights a deficiency in prompt-following capabilities that should be investigated further (Sec. 4.1).
5. Strong proprietary VLMs show significant improvement but still retain limited capability in leveraging ground-truth oracles. After three rounds of binary oracle feedback, GPT-4V and GPT-4o improve grounding accuracy substantially but still maintain error rates above 40% on the ADE20k dataset (Sec. 5.2).

2. Related Work

Self-Correction in LLMs: LLMs have shown some ability to criticize, refine, and correct their responses through prompt-based feedback [13, 23, 29, 37], supervised finetuning [17, 47, 64] or reinforcement learning [26]. This work examines whether VLMs can self-correct via prompt-based feedback. There remains little consensus on whether LLMs can effectively self-correct through additional prompts [17]. While previous studies suggest promise in prompt-based self-correction, they often rely on oracle feedback [23, 45], or weak prompts for initial responses [2, 37]. Follow-up research suggests that feedback generation limits self-correction [17]. On the other hand, prompt-based self-correction generally excels when useful external tools, such as code executors or search engines, are accessible [6, 12, 13, 19]; however, these tools are often unavailable in many scenarios. Fact-checking also shows success, as demonstrated by CoVe, which decomposes generation tasks into simpler verification steps, yielding robust feedback [11]. Drawing from the extensive literature on LLM self-correction, we analyze whether VLMs can self-correct, focusing on semantic grounding.

Prompting in LLMs and VLMs: In-context learning in LLMs [3] has led to new prompting techniques such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [55], Least-to-Most [71], and Step-Back [69] to enhance reasoning capabilities. CoT, in particular, showcases multiple reasoning paths to aid LLMs in solving complex tasks [54, 59]. However, these methods may be less effective in VLMs due to their limited in-context learning [65, 68]. Conversely, zero-shot CoT promotes model reasoning without the reliance on in-context learning by simply adding a guiding sentence before model responses [25].
For VLMs, prompting has predominantly involved visual cues. Studies have shown that models, when trained on extensive web data, can recognize specific visual markers, like red circles [46]. More recently, Set-of-Marks (SoM) prompting has enabled the GPT-4V to ground multiple objects by overlaying object identifiers on images [41, 57]. Our work incorporates these techniques to provide semantic grounding feedback to VLMs.

Multimodal Evaluation and Verification: Recent large-scale VLMs like CLIP [44] and GPT-4V [58] have introduced a new paradigm in multimodal evaluation. For example, traditional metrics struggle to accurately evaluate image captions [8, 22]. CLIPScore [18] leverages web-scale VLMs to assess the similarity between images and captions, aligning evaluations more closely with human judgments. Similarly, LLMScore [36] combines an image captioner with an off-the-shelf object detector to measure alignment for text-to-image models directly. More recently, GPT-4V has been applied as an automatic evaluator for vision language tasks, such as text-to-3D generation and embodied question answering [38, 56]. Motivated by the potential of using large VLMs as evaluators, we investigate their capability to evaluate and verify their own predictions, marking a shift from earlier approaches that separated predictors from verifiers.

3. Self-Correction in VLMs for Semantic Grounding

In this section, we first define semantic grounding and introduce the adopted self-correction framework for VLMs in Sec. 3.1. We then introduce two key research questions on whether VLMs can correct their own grounding mistakes through self-correction in Sec. 3.2. Finally, we summarize the evaluation metrics, datasets, and models comprising our experiment protocol in Sec. 3.3.

3.1. Setup: Semantic Grounding and Self-Correction

Semantic Grounding. We study semantic grounding [57, 66], mapping image regions to text, which [27] strongly correlates with visual reasoning abilities in VLMs. Formally, consider an image x in R^{h×w×3} where h and w denote the image’s height and width, respectively. There exists a priori image partition function that takes an image and produces N semantically distinct regions {ri}_{i=1}^N, where each ri is in [0, 1]^{h×w}. A general-purpose VLM is then tasked to take the image x, the image region ri, a text prompt q, and to output text oi = VLM(x, ri, q) that best describes the image region. The output format depends on the evaluation metrics of interest. Fig 2 (left) shows an example task prompt.
Following prior works [57, 66], we use ground-truth segmentation masks as semantically distinct image regions {ri}_{i=1}^N. We evaluate semantic grounding ability by whether the VLM can estimate the ground-truth class label for each region in every scene.

Self-Correction. The term ‘self-correction’ is broadly adopted in LLMs [21]. In this paper, we explore the setup involving explicit feedback generation from the same VLMs. Namely, we use a ‘Verifier’ instantiated from the same VLM to provide feedback on the previous predictions. If feedback suggests further refinement, the VLMs then take the feedback to refine their own predictions. Fig. 2 highlights the feedback dynamics between VLMs and Verifier.
For an image x and an image region ri, we refer the initial predictions without feedback as base predictions oi,0. For completeness, we study both oracle feedback f^* and self-generated feedback f^{VLM}. The feedback can be converted into text or visual marks to help VLMs correct their own mistakes. Appendix D shows the complete prompt templates.

3.2. Research Questions

Recently, LLMs have demonstrated significant improvements in performance on complex language semantic tasks such as coding and math reasoning by leveraging self-correction [6, 11, 23, 42]. We note that VLMs can process diverse visual and text inputs while simultaneously sustaining a dialogue from multiple input rounds similar to LLMs. To explore whether VLMs behave similarly to LLMs in self-correcting their errors in semantic grounding, we break it into two research questions:
1. Can VLMs receive and understand oracle feedback to improve semantic grounding?
2. Can VLMs provide high-quality binary feedback for themselves? We study binary feedback due to its lower task complexity, leading to a more reliable feedback signal for self-correction.
By systematically analyzing these two questions, we pave the way to improve semantic grounding in VLMs through self-correction without the access to oracle feedback in Section 4.2. For the rest of this section, we elaborate the questions and setups.

3.2.1. Can VLMs Receive and Understand Oracle Grounding Feedback?

We start by asking if VLMs can receive and understand oracle grounding feedback to improve base predictions. The results here can provide us an upper bound to improve semantic grounding in VLMs through self-correction. We study this question from two aspects: the types of feedback and the ways to prompt feedback to VLMs.
Feedback types. We ask: what type of feedback yields the best improvements in grounding performance? We consider two alternatives: (i) class label feedback – directly providing the ground-truth class labels in a text prompt; and (ii) binary feedback – providing a message on whether the previous prediction is correct. Fig. 2 (center) visualizes the two feedback types.
Ways to prompt feedback to VLMs. We ask: how should the feedback be prompted to a VLM? We consider several alternatives and visualize them in Fig. 3: (i) Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT): Motivated by [25] that shows that simply prepending a guiding sentence ‘Let’s think step-by-step’ before generation can strongly guide the LLMs for desired tasks, we use the guiding sentence ‘After examining the image and the expert analyses, the final answer is [output_template]’ for the semantic grounding tasks. Here, the feedback is referred as expert analyses to encourage the model to follow the feedback. (ii) Visual Marks: [46] shows that Internet-scale vision-language encoders are biased to attend to visual marks (e.g., red circles). (iii) Set-of-Mark (SoM): [57] shows that overlaying object identifiers on the image improves visual grounding.

3.2.2. Can VLMs Give Binary Grounding Feedback for Themselves?

Prior works in LLMs suggest that feedback generation is the bottleneck in self-correction [13, 43]. The survey paper in LLMs [21] identifies that decomposing complex generation tasks into easier verification tasks enables successful self-correction [11]. Following this insight, we study binary feedback, a message on whether the previous prediction is correct, due to its lower task complexity. We refer the VLMs performing verification to as ‘Verifier’. We study binary feedback verification by comparing it with generation-based verification [23, 37] referred to as “intrinsic self-correction” in prior work [19]. Furthermore, we also study the proper ways to prompt the Verifier.

Baseline: intrinsic self-correction. We adopt prior work in LLMs self-correction [23] to semantic grounding task. Here, we prompt the verifier to ‘Carefully review and refine your answer’ right after the base predictions to automatically correct grounding predictions. Although intrinsic self-correction doesn’t explicitly generate binary feedback, a binary signal can be obtained by comparing the alignment of grounding predictions before and after correction

Ways to prompt the Verifier. We consider several techniques and visualize them in Fig 3: (i) Visual marks: The verifier receives the image with a highlighted object of interest and a prompt to determine if the predicted class label accurately describes the object [46]. (ii) RoI crop: Prior work [15] distills features of cropped regions to the object detectors. Inspired by this, we design the verifier to receive a cropped image isolating the object of interest. (iii) A combination of Visual Marks and RoI crop.

3.3. Experiment Protocols

Datasets. We analyze the panoptic segmentation dataset from ADE20k [70], which was not previously used for instruction tuning in the open-source VLMs under study. This dataset includes a validation set comprising 2k complex, crowded scenes with over 30k masks across 150 distinct categories. We further validate our results in the iterative setting of COCO panoptic segmentation [24, 32]. Although the COCO dataset is a standard in visual grounding, most VLMs train on a visual instruction dataset derived from COCO, making it in-domain, unlike ADE20k. The COCO validation set consists of 5k images. Consistent with previous VLM grounding research [57], we utilize the same subset of 100 images from both ADE20k and COCO for our analysis.

VLMs. We analyze three state-of-the-art open-source VLMs including LLaVA-1.5 [33], ViP-LLaVA [4] and CogVLM [53]. LLaVA-1.5 is a successor of LLaVA [34], a visual instruction tuned VLM, and has scaled up to a larger model and a larger training dataset. ViP-LLaVA shares the overall model architecture and training strategy with LLaVA, but focuses on synthesizing a diverse set of visual marks in the training dataset, effectively improving the model performance when using visual prompts and allowing for a more user-friendly interface. CogVLM is a generalist VLM with highlights on integrating image and text features without sacrificing any performance on NLP tasks.

Grounding metrics. We evaluate semantic grounding performance by measuring classification accuracy. We use off-the-shelf sentence embeddings [20] to map the VLM outputs oi to the label from the class label list with the largest cosine similarity. We then report accuracy aggregated over all regions ri for each scene in the dataset. While it is not perfect, our quantitative analysis in Appendix B demonstrates that the errors are within a reasonable range.

Feedback metrics. We assess the VLM verifier’s capability to generate a binary feedback signal in F1 scores, considering the imbalanced distribution of oracle binary feedback. Appendix H.1 shows that F1 is a more representative metric than accuracy when evaluating feedback quality.

4. Empirical Findings

In this section, we experiment on ADE20k dataset to study the questions in Sec. 3.2. All experiments are run on three different seeds and we report the average performances.

4.1. Can VLMs Receive and Understand Oracle Grounding Feedback?

Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the base predictions for each model and the improved grounding accuracies after receiving oracle grounding feedback.

Findings of feedback types. With no additional prompting techniques (i.e., zero-shot CoT or visual prompts), Table 1 demonstrates that LLaVA-1.5 has the largest gains among the evaluated VLMs. When provided with oracle binary and class label feedback, LLaVA-1.5 improves the grounding accuracies by 5.18 and 61.06 points, respectively. We find that VLMs can receive and understand oracle feedback to improve performance, without requiring any additional data or architectural modifications.

Intuitively, oracle class label feedback yields the most improvement, since it directly reveals the class labels and consequently reduces the semantic grounding task to a text retrieval problem. Perhaps surprisingly, oracle class label feedback does not automatically improve accuracy to 100%. This outcome highlights a limitation in open-source VLMs’ ability to perform tasks based solely on language understanding, indicating a potential area for improvement in these models [31]. Indeed, some models fail in approximately 25% of cases in this scenario, demonstrating a significant deficiency in prompt-following capabilities that warrants further investigation (see Table 1, Class Label Feedback)

Findings of ways to prompt binary feedback to VLMs. Given the simplicity and effectiveness of oracle binary feedback, we further investigate the ways to prompt binary feedback to VLMs. In Table 2, we explore both textual and visual prompts to encourage the uses of the oracle binary feedback.

We first show that zero-shot CoT augments oracle binary feedback for every model considered by up to 2.26 accuracy points. This aligns with trends in LLMs that suggest the effectiveness of CoT to improve reasoning [25, 55]. On the other hand, visual prompting with SoM [57] does not significantly improve beyond zero-shot CoT for models that were not already pre-trained with data featuring visual prompting cues (e.g., LLaVa-1.5). In contrast, ViP-LLaVA was specifically trained for interpreting visual cues; this model improves with both SoM and visual marks (e.g., red circles). Notably, the combination of zero-shot CoT and visual marks emerges as the most effective strategy, increasing by an average of 7.45 grounding accuracy points relative to the base predictions. Thus, for open-source VLMs, we identify that the best way to introduce binary feedback in semantic grounding is to combine visual marks and zero-shot CoT.

4.2. Can VLMs Give Binary Grounding Feedback for Themselves?

We assess the quality of binary feedback using F1 scores due to potentially imbalanced oracle feedback. Table 3 provides F1 scores of intrinsic self-correction and the binary feedback produced by a VLM Verifier.

Results. We first assess the effectiveness of intrinsic self-correction, which involves continuing another round of conversation by asking ‘Carefully review and refine your answer’ to the VLM and directly outputting the revised predictions. We derive the binary feedback by comparing whether the revised predictions differ from the initial predictions. When evaluated in accuracy, intrinsic self-correction achieves low accuracies at 47.03, 47.13, and 59.5 on LLaVA-1.5, ViP-LLaVA, and CogVLM, respectively. Aligned with the previous studies on LLMs, we find that VLMs struggle to improve via intrinsic self-correction out-of-the-box.

In Table 3, we identify that binary verification mechanism for VLM using RoI crop significantly improves the F1 score for all three models, by up to 18.81 points. This observation aligns well with the strong self-evaluation capabilities in LLMs. We may also augment this binary verification with visual marks such as red circles. Additionally, the choice of visual prompting technique should be tailored to the specific VLM. For instance, RoI crop tends to be more effective for networks not trained on visual marks (e.g., LLaVA-1.5 and CogVLM), while visual marks yield better results for models accustomed to such cues (e.g., ViP-LLaVA).

5. Can VLMs Correct their Grounding Errors through Self-Correction?

Our key findings in Sec. 4 show that (1) VLMs can receive and understand oracle feedback and (2) VLMs can give binary feedback for themselves. We now combine them to evaluate whether VLMs can self-correct their mistakes by leveraging another instance of the same model. Furthermore, can VLMs iteratively perform self-correction to trade compute for performances?

5.1. Setup: Iterative Self-Correction in VLMs

We introduce an iterative dialogue loop between a VLM agent and Verifier, where at the first timestep t = 0, the VLM obtains base predictions {oi,0} for every scene (Sec. 3.1). We then prompt the Verifier to generate a binary feedback signal for every prediction f^{VLM}(x, ri, oi,0) (Sec. 3.2.2). In the next timestep, the VLM agent uses this binary feedback to revise predictions (Sec. 3.2.1). We repeat these steps to a maximum iteration count or until the verifier agrees with the prediction.

In our experiments, to encourage feedback receiving, we use the textual prompts (i.e., zero-shot CoT) and the visual prompts (i.e., red circles for open-source VLMs and SoM for proprietary VLMs). To generate binary feedback, we use RoI crop. Consistent with prior work [57], we use the same subset of 100 images for ADE20k and COCO for our analysis.

Baselines. Similar to Sec. 3.2.2, we adopt intrinsic self-correction adopted [23] as our baseline. To identify the self-correction upper bounds of each VLM, we also report the performances of self-correction with the access to oracle binary feedback, referred to as Oracle Verification.

Proprietary VLMs. Open-source VLMs often suffer from shorter context window or limited instruction following capabilities. We, therefore, experiment the identified self-correction framework using GPT-4V [58] and GPT-4o.

Base predictions generation. The self-correction survey in LLMs [21] finds that the weak initial predictions can lead to false promises in self-correction. We attempted to improve open-source VLMs by adding SoM prompt, but observed significant performance drops compared to using bounding boxes alone. For LLaVA-1.5, the base predictions achieve 35.86 in ADE20k. However, adding SoM and using RoI crop result in 11.06 and 19.67, respectively. This may be because most open-source VLMs, including the three in our study, are trained to identify image regions using bounding boxes [60, 66]. In contrast, proprietary VLMs have shown strong improvements with SoM [57]. Therefore, we adopted SoM to generate base predictions for GPT-4V and GPT-4o.

5.2. Main Results

Open-source VLMs. Tables 4 and 5 illustrate that multiple rounds of oracle binary feedback consistently enhance the performance of all open-source VLMs, with gains ranging from 6.14 to 17.34 in ADE20k and 6.45 to 15.28 in COCO. The identified VLM binary verification, despite producing noisy feedback, also consistently improves grounding accuracy by 0.39 to 4.43 points in ADE20k and 1.91 to 4.04 points in COCO. These gains are consistent across all three open-source VLMs, underscoring the benefits of iterative feedback for zero-shot improvements in grounding accuracy, even with noisy feedback.

In sharp contrast, intrinsic self-correction decreases downstream grounding in all settings by up to 10 points, except where base predictions are weak, such as with CogVLM in COCO. We empirically find that self-correction cannot reliably identify the alreadily correct predictions. We stop intrinsic self-correction in the third rounds due to its consistent negative impacts.

GPT-4V and GPT-4o. GPT-4V and GPT-4o improve predictions with both VLM binary feedback and oracle binary feedback, even more than the open-source VLMs do. In particular, GPT-4o significantly improves and sometimes surpasses GPT-4V, especially when incorporating oracle binary feedback. However, perhaps surprising, even with oracle binary feedback indicating prediction correctness, strong GPT-4V and GPT4o fail to provide correct responses after three turns with less than 60 points accuracy overall in ADE20k. We find that running for three rounds is enough to identify the consistent trend.

Similar to open-source VLMs, GPT-4V exhibit negative gains for intrinsic self-correction. Intriguingly, there are stark differences between GPT-4V and GPT-4o: GPT-4V shows a 17-point drop in accuracy in ADE20k, while GPT-4o sees a 7-point increase in COCO. The reasons for these sharp differences remain unclear due to unknown model architectures and specific training data used in proprietary models. However, we note that the identified VLM binary verification consistently improves upon both base predictions and intrinsic self-correction with enough dialogue rounds.

We emphasize that the identified VLM binary feedback verification requires no access to external tool or oracle. Thus, our results show that VLMs can iteratively self-correct their own grounding mistakes when prompted in a proper way. We anticipate the improvements from iterative self-correction will improve with future VLMs.

6. Conclusion

This work explores the potentials of self-correction in VLMs in the context of semantic grounding. We break down this into two key research questions (i) Can VLMs receive and understand oracle grounding feedback and (ii) Can VLMs provide grounding feedback? Across two datasets and five VLMs including proprietary ones, we demonstrate that with the identified VLM binary feedback verification, VLMs can iterative self-correct their own grounding mistakes. Within five rounds of VLM binary feedback, open-source VLMs and proprietary VLMs improve up to 4 and 8 accuracy points. We highlight that the self-correction in VLMs requires no access to oracle or any finetuning or architectural changes.

Limitations. Despite the advances in VLMs’ semantic grounding through self-correction, this approach trades compute for performance. Appendix C shows the GPT-4o performance-cost tradeoff. Therefore, feedback-based reasoning becomes less practical in applications requiring low latency. Additionally, assessing VLMs’ zero-shot capabilities with close-set vocabularies highlights language ambiguities. For instance, in ADE20k, similar classes like ‘grass’, ‘field’, ‘plant’, and ‘tree’ exacerbate this issue. For proprietary VLMs, we include the class list in the prompt, but this does not resolve ambiguities as each dataset may define the same classes differently. Appendix B provides additional quantitative analysis on the errors in class mapping. We expect future generations of open-source VLMs to achieve significant quantitative improvements in these tasks.
